Contact
                                      Colby Hanjan, CF APMP
www.linkedin.com/in/colby-hanjan      Proposals @ ICF I APMP Liberty Board Member
(LinkedIn)                            Greater Hartford

Top Skills                            Summary
Commercial Proposals
                                      APMP certified proposal manager for complex government proposals
Public Sector
                                      for the Federal, State, and Local markets, ranging from task order
Written Communication
                                      proposals to $1B+ IDIQ proposals. Serving public sector clients
Languages                             through global consulting in digital transformation, public health, and
                                      technology. Secured wins at a wide range of agencies, including
English
                                      USAID, DoD, CMS, IRS, HHS, DOJ, SBA, and GSA. Responds
Certifications                        with solutions focused in Cloud IT, agile, human-centered design,
                                      and MEL/KM systems for mission-driven projects that deliver
Fundamentals of Digital Marketing
Certificate                           positive impacts for the publicAmbitious, deadline-oriented, and
APMP® Bid and Proposal                driven towards growth. Dedicated to best practices in business
Management Foundation 2023            development and proposal management following industry standard
                                      lifecycles (Shipley) Interests:-Technical Writing: Proposals,
Honors-Awards                         Contracts, Business Reports-Creative Writing: Fiction &amp; Poetry-
Poetic Journeys Award Recipient       International Travel: I have explored over 22 different countries in
                                      South America, Europe. Asia, and Africa.I hold a Master of Science
Publications                          in Professional Writing from New York University (2019) and a BA in
3 Poems: "Billy Pilgrim Ponders,      English from the University of Connecticut (2015).
A trumpet played into a smoky
chimney, & My Friends Are Artists
and I Am Grateful For Them"
Poem: "What Matters In Darkness"      Experience
1 poem: "Come To Think Of It, It
Actually Isn't Better This Way"       ICF
The New New Frontier: Digital         Senior Proposal Manager - State and Local
Dating in a Changing Social Climate   March 2025 - Present (1 year)
Poem: "Missing"                       Reston, VA

                                      Leads cross-functional teams through complex proposal lifecycles for public
                                      health, energy, climate digital modernization, and disaster recovery work. As a
                                      member of the Enterprise Proposal Center (EPC), manages high priority and
                                      dollar value proposals that are must-wins for ICF.


                                      APMP Liberty
                                      Programs Chair
                                      December 2024 - Present (1 year 3 months)



                                                                         Page 1 of 3
Bixal
4 years 8 months

Proposal Manager
October 2021 - March 2025 (3 years 6 months)
• Shredded, developed compliance matrix, outline, and templates for proposals
on contract vehicles for USAID EVAL ME II, GSA OASIS, GSA PSS, and GSA
IT 70.
• Managed proposals with subcontractor inputs and external consultants
through data calls and defined expectations of contribution and collaboration
• Shepherds potential opportunities through capture gate reviews, Go-No-Go
process, and weekly pipeline checkpoints

Proposal Writer
August 2020 - November 2021 (1 year 4 months)
Virginia, United States


Civix
Senior Proposal Writer
February 2017 - August 2020 (3 years 7 months)
Windsor, Connecticut, United States

Formerly PCC Technology Inc., rebranded as Civix
enior Proposal Writer at a GovTech 100 company. Develops proposals
for State Government software solutions (SaaS and custom) for Business
Services, Ethics and Campaign Finance, Elections and Voter Registration, and
Land Management.
•   Develops compliant and responsive proposals in conjunction with subject
matter experts, solution teams, marketing, sales executives, and capture
leadership
•   Drives proposal efforts from start to finish by coordinating checkpoints,
response schedule, and Shipley color reviews (Pink, Red, Gold)
• Prepares response template in accordance with guidelines in the RFP in
compliance with the
company branding guidelines.
•   Coordinates pursuit strategy and win theme messaging
• Curates and maintains a standardized content library using Qvidian proposal
automation software and Sharepoint cloud repository. Improved reusability of
content to prepopulate 60% of proposals.


A/Z Corporation
Project Controls Associate

                                   Page 2 of 3
August 2015 - February 2017 (1 year 7 months)
North Stonington, CT

• Responsible for timely review, processing and distribution of required
technical documents such as submittals, requests for information, and
supplemental project information between project management and federal
government.
•   On-site support to project management on multi-million dollar construction
job for Department of Homeland Security, reporting full time to Plum Island,
New York.
• Coordinate logistics and security clearances with federal government for all
subcontractors involved in project.
• Prepare RFP's for prospective clients through editing, compiling, and
formatting proposals.




Gilman Gear
Marketing Assistant
June 2015 - August 2015 (3 months)
Gilman, CT


Globe Pequot Press
Editorial Assistant
2014 - 2014 (less than a year)




Education
New York University
Master’s Degree, Professional Writing · (2016 - 2019)


University of Connecticut
Bachelor of Arts (B.A.), English · (2011 - 2015)




                                      Page 3 of 3
