Contact
farrell0627@gmail.com
                               Farrell Martin
                               Director, Client Excellence - The Facilities Group
www.linkedin.com/in/farrell-   Commerce, Georgia, United States
martin-412713b (LinkedIn)

                               Summary
Top Skills
Account Management             Highly effective solution applications leader with a track record
Sales                          of building strong relationships with external and internal clients
Strategic Planning             to achieve desired results. Particularly strong in increasing client
                               engagement by using technology to allow the client to be in control
                               of their experience. Passionate about developing new product
                               markets, increasing client loyalty, expanding employee engagement
                               and using data visualization to unearth inventive insights. Diversely
                               skilled in Sales, Finance, Project Management, and Operations in
                               both Fortune 100 and startup organizations. Years of experience
                               working with some of the largest retailers in the country, including
                               The Home Depot, Walmart, Office Depot, Dollar Tree and many
                               others. Committed to contributing to a business unit that stands firm
                               in its conviction to strong core values.



                               Experience
                               The Facilities Group
                               Director, Client Excellence
                               November 2025 - February 2026 (4 months)


                               Vixxo
                               Director - Client Success
                               January 2018 - November 2025 (7 years 11 months)
                               Atlanta, Georgia


                               FacilitySource
                               Account Director - Southeast
                               May 2016 - November 2017 (1 year 7 months)
                               Greater Atlanta Area

                               Responsible for growing and maintaining relationships between FacilitySource
                               and services clients - lead and execute balanced sales growth within a finite
                               set of existing FacilitySource accounts, focused on profitable business growth
                               while maintaining and improving customer satisfaction.


                                                                  Page 1 of 5
Ecova
7 years 7 months

Business Solutions Director
November 2013 - April 2016 (2 years 6 months)
Provide sales support to nationwide network of Sales Directors and Manager
as Subject Matter Expert (SME) on Facility Optimization aspects of the Ecova
services portfolio. I work closely with clients to better understand short and
long term goals and partner with internal delivery teams to tailor a suite of
services to help clients meet their energy and sustainability objectives.

Director Sales - Account Executive
October 2008 - November 2013 (5 years 2 months)
Accountable for driving incremental sales through the expansion of Ecova's
portfolio of supply and demand-side energy management services across
existing base of retail, services and telecom clients.
Develop and maintain critical business relationships with client stakeholders
having oversight over currently contracted services - leverage these
relationships to expand Ecova influence horizontally and vertically to expose
Ecova value delivery potential to adjacent departments and executive
decision-makers.
Through in-depth analysis of client's historical business processes and
consumption trends, define enterprise-wide energy consumption and spend
profile. Use this profile to establish a client baseline and to develop an energy
strategy, including plans that highlight technology, process and procedure-
based opportunities for consumption and cost reductions. Develop tactical
plans to highlight the key steps to achieving the defined strategy and ensuring
client return expectations are met.


The Home Depot
8 years 10 months

Director of Merchandising - Installed Services
August 2005 - September 2008 (3 years 2 months)
Responsible for ideation, rationalization, execution and on-going management
of new business concepts and existing businesses in The Home Depot
Services division - sold concepts to multiple executive levels to achieve go-
forward buy-in. Conducted line reviews to ensure all products sourced upheld
The Home Depot reputation and image.
Built networks of independent dealers to sell and install products through
1800 The Home Depot Stores - drafted all contract language, defined service


                                      Page 2 of 5
level expectations, negotiated all margins across each business concept and
aligned goals throughout the value chain.
Developed multi-vehicle marketing and promotion campaigns to convey the
consumer value proposition for each business concept to drive year over
year sales growth - all campaigns unique to the product/service offering and
consumer dynamics. Built all store, market and company-wide sales goals
based on economic trends, historical industry and program performance and
future sales growth expectations.
Conducted periodic competitive deep dives to determine own business' place
in the market and to track industry-wide innovations - partnered with vendors to
drive innovation into product offering.

Senior Manager - Logistics
December 2004 - July 2005 (8 months)
Provided network wide oversight across a multi-facility distribution network
to ensure consistent execution of processes and best practice sharing.
Drove network-wide operational consistency through the development and
publication of Operating Standards manuals (Playbook).
Developed core Key Performance Indicators (KPI) to represent cost and
operational drivers and aligned internal metrics with third party provider goals,
resulting in monthly positive trends toward meeting company goals.
Drove network performance improvement through a collaborative approach to
problem identification and action plan development and follow-up.

Crossdock Facility Manager
September 2002 - December 2004 (2 years 4 months)
Managed start up and ongoing operation of high-speed crossdock facility.
Managed a $26M+ operating budget.
Created cohesive supply chain network by bridging gap in communication and
processes between vendors and store operations.
Developed partnership with 3PL and dedicated carrier to ensure seamless
operation while achieving operational and financial goals.

Logistics Manager - Distribution Services
May 2001 - September 2002 (1 year 5 months)
Developed supply chain strategy for the distribution of imported merchandise
based on expected increase in import product penetration and future store
count growth.
Using i2 supply chain software, played a key role in long range strategy
development for the Import Distribution Center (IDC) network.


                                    Page 3 of 5
Developed proforma financial documents and sold IDC strategy to executive
level, leading to rollout of expanded network in Northwest, Southwest and Mid-
Atlantic divisions with net decrease to total logistics expense - 3M total square
feet.

Financial Analyst - Imports and Logistics
December 1999 - May 2001 (1 year 6 months)
Served as the financial voice on a logistics team assign to develop a high
speed, low cost alternative for shipping domestic goods from suppliers to The
Home Depot stores across the United States.
Developed, tracked and analyzed weekly metrics for in-house crossdock
program.
Assisted Supply Chain Team in various Ad Hoc analyses of logistics issues
including future site locations, 3PL pricing and expense tracking.
Prepared proformas for new facilities and completed budgets for approved
sites.
Utilized financial modeling to analyze and report on financial health of 3PL
candidates and made recommendations to Supply Chain management.
Conducted in-depth variance analysis of TF program performance and
communicated results to executive level management.
Served as liaison between Supply Chain team and Accounting departments.


Prestige Wine of South Carolina
General Manager
June 1998 - December 1999 (1 year 7 months)
Fulfilled Operations Manager role in startup wholesale/distribution business
that bought boutique wines from California and Europe and sold them to on-
premise and off-premise customers throughout the state of South Carolina.
Developed and implemented tactical and strategic sales and marketing
programs for numerous, segmented markets throughout the State of South
Carolina.
Created an annual budget to track efficiency of the operation and monitor
progress over course of fiscal year. Presented results to investors on quarterly
basis.
Developed internal processes of inventory control to facilitate error free order
processing and delivery.
Managed A/R, A/P and payroll and developed pricing strategies to maintain
appropriate gross margins.




                                    Page 4 of 5
Education
Kennesaw State University
M.B.A, Marketing · (1998)


Kennesaw State University
B.B.A, General Business · (1996)


Massachusetts Institute of Technology
· (2003 - 2003)




                                   Page 5 of 5
