                                                                                                                                    Search Navigatio




                               APMP BOK Home (/)     Understand BD (/understand-business-development)
TABLE OF CONTENTS

  Phases in the Business
                                   Introduction to the Business Development
  Development Lifecycle
                                   Lifecycle
  1. Market identification

  2. Account planning and          The business development lifecycle is about winning business. A clear business development
  positioning                      process based on best practices can help organizations identify opportunities and win bid in a
                                   repeatable, sustainable way.
  3. Opportunity assessment
  (identification and
  qualification)
                                   Successful organizations of all sizes and in all markets manage with discipline and proven
  4. Opportunity/capture
  planning
                                   leadership principles. Few organizations succeed on luck alone. At the core of most
                                   organizations’ success is business development—the ability to generate revenue that sustains
  5. Proposal planning
                                   the business or organization.
  6. Proposal development
                                   A key goal of any business development team is to advance a business opportunity and move
  7. Negotiation and post-
                                   toward being in a favored position from the customer’s perspective, as shown in Figure 1.
  submittal activity

  8. Delivery and ongoing
  customer relationships

  Application in Diverse
  Environments

  Recent Trends

  Growth of small businesses

  Teaming arrangements

  Changes in procurement
  processes

  Common Pitfalls and
  Misconceptions

  Necessity of the business        Figure 1: Increasing the Probability of Winning. By positioning products or services early
  development process
                                   and building strong customer relationships, organizations improve their probability of winning
  Importance of bid decision       a contract.
  gates and positioning
                                   Advancing an opportunity through sales stages helps move an organization from an unknown
  Importance of early
  customer involvement             position in the market to a known position. Through effective marketing, opportunity, and
                                   sales activity, organizations attempt to advance to an improved position with
  Summary
                                   the customer and ultimately to become the solution of choice in a favored position.
  Terms to Know
                                        Unknown position – Early in the business development lifecycle, many companies are
  See Also
                                        in unknown positions with potential customers. Through effective marketing and long-
                                        term positioning, companies achieve known positions.
                                        Known position – Using their brand, market messaging, and early sales strategies,
                                        companies develop known positions in relation to potential customers.
                                        Improved position – Effective relationship-building strategies and selling skills can
                                        advance companies into improved positions with potential customers.
     Favored position – In many market segments, organizations collaborate with customers
     to develop a business case based on customer needs, issues, and hot buttons. This
     collaboration builds trust and helps put companies into a favored position with
     customers.

A disciplined approach to business development requires that organizations follow the
processes that work for their own environment. A foundational process and proven, core tools
and best practices are a good starting point. But organizations will be most successful if they
tailor business development lifecycles to fit their own strategic plans. Organizations should
modify methods, tools, personnel, and infrastructure to fit their markets and internal working
environments.

Market shifts and internal organizational changes (i.e., mergers, acquisitions, and succession
plans) require a flexible, nimble business development lifecycle. Organizations must adapt
quickly if market conditions change. For example, if a product moves from being specialized to
being a commodity, a company’s approach to positioning, marketing, and competing for
business must shift—perhaps toward more of a services model to support its products.

Linking the business development lifecycle to the overall organizational strategic plan is
critical. Companies must also consider business development and proposal organizations’
activities, no matter how mature, during strategic planning activities at all levels. The
common approach to strategic planning includes a careful internal and external strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis. SWOT analysis also must include
the business development organization.

Regardless of their maturity level, organizations must invest in strategic planning to facilitate
business development. They must consider their positioning and their competitors’
positioning as they develop strategic plans and business development lifecycles to meet
future objectives.



Phases in the Business Development
Lifecycle
APMP best practices suggest that the business development lifecycle comprises eight basic
phases. However, each phase and its associated decision gates, steps, and reviews should be
tailored to an individual organization and market environment. No one phase is more
important than another; they must all work together to identify and advance the best
opportunities.

The business development lifecycle includes activities and phases that focus on planning and
performing (executing). The End-to-End Process (/manage-processes/end-to-end-process)
section further details the best practices associated with the process.

Figure 2 shows how the business development lifecycle’s phases and activities work together
to win business. Each element depends on the others—all requiring input and ongoing
updates.
Figure 2: The Business Development Lifecycle. Discipline at each phase improves win rates
and leads to sustainable processes that fuel ongoing success.

The eight phases of the business development lifecycle are:


1. Market identification

Organizations must make clear decisions about the markets they intend to pursue and
penetrate. The market risk assessment is a valuable tool for organizations as they assess
their risk and investment tolerance for selling to new or existing markets with new or existing
products or services. Market risk is highest for opportunities with new customers and new
products; market risk is lowest for opportunities with existing customers and existing
products.

Figure 3 shows how Market Identification factors and likelihood of winning change as market
decisions are made. For example, the organization experiences the highest level of market
risk, the lowest probability of winning, and likely the greatest investment required in
Quadrant 4, where new products or services are being positioned and sold into new markets.
Figure 3: Market and Customer Match Matrix. This tool can help organizations understand
the effort it may take to succeed in a chosen marketplace.

The Market Identification stage helps organizations ensure that they spend marketing
budgets and resources on the most likely targets for profitable business opportunities.
Organizations must constantly assess and re-evaluate their markets, identifying new market
segments and validating current markets. Whether to enter a specific market is a key decision
gate at this phase of the business development lifecycle.


2. Account planning and positioning

An account can be a prospective customer, an existing customer, an entire organization, or a
single buying unit within a large company.

Account planning involves long-term positioning with a potential customer and is an ongoing
activity across the business development lifecycle. Account plans must be adjusted as
opportunities progress through the sales pipeline or as new opportunities arise. This phase
includes marketing activities that position an organization in the market and with specific
target customers.

Account planning requires an unbiased assessment of current account activity and future
potential business opportunities. Typically, an account plan consists of historical account
information, buying history, key customer personnel and decision makers, and strategies for
penetrating or growing an account. An account plan often feeds into an opportunity/capture
plan when specific opportunities are qualified. An account plan drives long-term positioning
strategies with target customers with strong future sales opportunities.

Many successful organizations store account planning data in a Customer Relationship
Management (CRM) system and keep data up to date.
3. Opportunity assessment (identification and qualification)

A key decision gate at the opportunity assessment phase of the business development
lifecycle is a preliminary bid/no-bid decision on a specific opportunity.

Organizations can identify sales opportunities through many channels, including marketing
campaigns, traditional prospecting, social media efforts, and lobbying strategies. Generally, a
marketing team works in collaboration with a sales or opportunity team to identify and
qualify potential opportunities.

Decisions made earlier in the business development lifecycle significantly affect this phase.
Strategic planning and market positioning/segmentation often can dictate how organizations
identify opportunities and put them into the sales pipeline.

Many successful organizations use third-party sales opportunity tracking programs
(subscriptions) to track and monitor future bidding opportunities, especially in regional and
national markets. These programs can help identify upcoming opportunities based on specific
filters used during opportunity searches.

Qualifying opportunities is a key step to improving overall win rates. Companies that do not
adequately qualify opportunities often overspend their marketing and sales budgets and
pursue too many opportunities that they have a low probability of winning. As a result, these
companies divert resources from more winnable deals and from delivery of projects that
could lead to renewals.

     Is there an incumbent on this opportunity?
     What is the incumbent’s performance?
     Who are known competitors?
     Are there possible unknown competitors?
     Can we win? Can we deliver profitably?
     Do we need to team with another organization?
     What will it cost us to bid?
     Will bidding this opportunity better position us for future opportunities?
     Does this opportunity fit within our strategic plan and vision?

Careful competitive assessment and evaluation are also key at this phase of the lifecycle.
Knowing competitors’ strengths and weaknesses as they relate to the opportunity is critical.


4. Opportunity/capture planning

Opportunity/capture planning starts early in the lifecycle and continues through proposal
submission. This planning involves customer interaction and effective sales to
understand customer needs and issues. Critical aspects of opportunity/capture
planning include knowledge of portfolio management and the 4Cs:

     Customer – Gain a basic understanding of the customer’s situation, needs, hot buttons,
     issues, and biases. This understanding will deepen as the opportunity advances.
     Competition – Carefully and thoroughly analyze the competition. Identify whether there
     is an incumbent, known competitors, or potential unknown competitors. Also determine
     whether you have a competitive advantage or disadvantage in pursuing the opportunity.
     Other potential “competitors” might be the customer deciding to do nothing, spend
     money on other things, or do the work in-house.
     Cost – Is there a history of pricing on this opportunity? Include a Competitive Price To
     Win analysis, at some level, as part of your opportunity planning. As the opportunity
     advances and you gain more information, adjust your price to better achieve the Price To
     Win target.
     Company and solution – From the customer’s perspective, assess your organization’s
     solution, past performance, reputation, and risk.
     Portfolio management – Weigh opportunities against each other and view resources to
     develop and pursue opportunities as an investment. Only pursue opportunities with a
     return on investment (ROI) versus a probability of win that supports the overall
     portfolio.

Keep in mind that this process doesn’t always go in this order; you may need to revisit the
qualification decision as you learn more about the customer and the opportunity.

Figure 4 shows how the pursuit decision leads to the opportunity/capture planning phase of
the business development lifecycle. A thorough opportunity/capture plan should evolve from
this phase of the cycle.




Figure 4: Opportunity/Capture Planning. Opportunity/capture planning activities are critical
to repeat success in business development.

Regardless of the size or complexity of an opportunity, a Sales or Opportunity/Capture
Manager should take time to plan. The plan’s level of detail will depend on the opportunity,
including its complexity and dollar value.


5. Proposal planning

If done effectively, planning a proposal will save time, resources, and money. Before the bid
request arrives, organizations should assemble a core proposal team to prepare a proposal
management plan focused on the five proposal planning activities. These activities are
essential to transferring customer issues and needs identified during opportunity planning
into proposal strategies, solutions, a Competitive Price To Win analysis, and mitigations.

Focus on these five key proposal planning activities:

     Migrating data from the opportunity plan to a proposal plan or to proposal planning
     tools
     Extending the opportunity/capture strategy into the proposal strategy. A proposal
     strategy consists of statements of an organization’s position and how it plans to make
     each point in its proposal. Organizations can capture this transfer by preparing a draft
     executive summary.
     Refining the solution and Price To Win target
     Engaging the right staff for the proposal team and securing the right executive support
     Holding a proposal kickoff meeting to share planning activities with the proposal team

In completing these activities, an organization should conduct a review to validate and
suggest improvements to its proposal strategy. The opportunity/capture plan review team
reviews the technical, management, and pricing solution against the customer’s needs and
requirements, alignment with the opportunity/capture strategy, and competitive focus.

Adjustments made at this time, especially before the bid request comes out, help to maintain
the alignment between pre-proposal activities and solutions and the proposal’s description of
these solutions. Often, organizations use mockups and content plans as proposal
planning tools that make proposal development and writing more customer focused.


6. Proposal development

As the opportunity matures and a formal bid request is released, proposal development kicks
into high gear. If the opportunity is still viable, the planning documents prepared in the
previous phase now become working proposal development documents.

At this stage, bid planning activities—including changes to the solution, strategy, teaming
partners, proposal organization, proposal schedule, and workshare—should stop. Ongoing
changes result in wasted time and resources and can lead to a mediocre proposal that’s
frustrating to prepare.

Organizations should use compliance tracking tools, such as compliance checklists, response
matrices, and writers’ assignments, to ensure that they’re meeting the bid request
requirements. They should also use communication tools to validate progress, troubleshoot
proposal content, and address concerns. Finally, they should conduct short check-ins to
monitor progress and status to ensure that deliverables and schedules are met.

When the Bid or Proposal Manager is satisfied with section drafts, the manager should
submit them for final document review. A team should review a complete draft proposal
beginning with the executive summary, all volumes (including cost), and other items required
at submittal. A Final Document Review team evaluates the draft proposal from
the customer’s perspective.

The review team makes recommendations for improvement. After completing changes and
receiving final approval, the organization submits the proposal to the customer. Organizations
vary in how they execute the proposal development process based on the nature of their
business and the complexity of bid they submit.


7. Negotiation and post-submittal activity

Submittal of a proposal does not signal the end of the business development lifecycle. On the
contrary, this is the phase where business decisions become intense and real.

Many customers request clarifications or have discussions with bidders before making a final
decision. These may lead to proposal modifications.

An organization’s strategy during this phase should be to respond fully to customer questions
and concerns and to reinforce the customer’s trust in its solution and organization. Companies
should prepare the appropriate materials for final revisions, presentations, or any submissions
the customer requires to complete the selection process.

While interacting with the customer, refine your opportunity/capture plan information and
plan for customer meetings and live discussions.

Overall, an organization’s strategy should be fairly simple:

     To respond fully to customer questions and concerns
     To reinforce a customer’s trust in its solution and organization
     To optimize the deal to the benefit of the bidder and customer
Conducting a lessons-learned review on each bid opportunity is a critical best practice.
Lessons learned should be well documented and stored for others to access and reference on
future sales opportunities. Make lessons learned part of an account plan, with all information
captured in the CRM or tracking system.


8. Delivery and ongoing customer relationships

Effective business development activities continue throughout the solution delivery phase.
This happens through ongoing interaction with the customer. Winning the contract is
an opportunity to prove value and position your organization for additional opportunities.

Effectively executing on a contract is the best way to position for future business with an
account or client organization. Apply account management techniques, such as
regular customer contact, product demonstrations and upgrades, social marketing, and
participation in relevant industry and trade events. These activities demonstrate an ongoing
interest in the customer’s business and success and help position your organization for future
opportunities.



Application in Diverse Environments
Situations that require tailoring of the cycle include:

     Organizational size – In smaller organizations, some professionals serve in many roles,
     both within business development and in other departments. Small companies must
     adapt and modify the cycle, phases, and activities to fit their environments. For example,
     a company bidding on a $20,000/year plant care project for a local bank must focus on
     the customer relationship and be less formal but still rigorous about a market or
     opportunity assessment or opportunity plan.
     Global, regional, or single-site organizations – Depending on the geographic
     location(s) of an organization, the business development lifecycle must be adapted to fit
     the environment. Competing and bidding to foreign countries, for example, requires
     more focus on market assessment and readiness than a single, local office bidding on a
     contract with a known customer.
     Customer and market conditions – Many organizations compete for government
     contracts at the regional, national, or international union levels. Others bid for work in
     the business-to-business (B2B) sector. Each market requires a unique approach to
     applying the business development lifecycle. For example, the U.S. federal government
     requires strict adherence to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) when competing.
     Many local governments have unique clauses and requirements. Clients in highly
     regulated procurement and bid environments often have longer lead times for awarding
     contracts.

In a B2B setting, there is generally more flexibility in the opportunity planning and proposal
development process, allowing for more creativity in approach. The business development
lifecycle should be adapted to fit the B2B environment and be user friendly for sales and
marketing organizations. Organizations working in B2B environments often consolidate the
phases listed previously to meet faster timeframes for preparing and submitting proposals.

Regardless of the market, it is critical that organizations establish and adhere to a repeatable
process that allows them to efficiently compete for and win business.



Recent Trends
Growth of small businesses

Evidence suggests that small businesses are winning an increasing share of contracts. Small
businesses that have plans to expand their target markets and begin competing against
larger organizations should upgrade their business development lifecycles. Such
organizations need to address new areas of competition and new competitors to improve
their positions with customers within the new market space. Failure to re-examine business
processes may cause growing organizations to spend more time bidding and less time
winning.


Teaming arrangements

Teaming arrangements are becoming a common approach to bidding on complex business
opportunities in all markets. Customers often expect potential bidders to team with other
companies to provide solutions. Coordinating opportunity and proposal efforts in a teaming
arrangement provides unique challenges that must be addressed early in the business
development lifecycle.


Changes in procurement processes

Procurement processes are evolving around the world, in both the public and private sectors.
For example, greater use of eProcurement, the move to more "competitive dialogue"-type bid,
represents a trend toward more strategic procurement. A trend that is changing is a move
toward Lowest Price Technically Acceptable (LPTA) contracts. This requires the customer to
award the lowest-price proposal with an acceptable technical solution.

The LPTA method isn't a one-size-fits-all solution. It's most suitable in the following
scenarios:

     Clearly Defined Requirements: LPTA works best when the technical requirements are
     well-defined and unambiguous.
     Standard Products or Services: When purchasing commodities or standardized services
     where technical nuances play a minimal role.
     Limited Technical Variance: When the differences in technical superiority among
     vendors don't provide significant additional value.

However, there are also instances where LPTA might not be the best choice:

     Complex Projects: For projects where the technical complexity is high, the risk of
     choosing a vendor solely based on price can be substantial.
     Innovation is Key: When the objective is to foster innovation, a trade-off method might
     be more appropriate, allowing for a balance between cost and innovative solutions.
     Long-Term Implications: When long-term outcomes might be affected by a slight
     compromise in quality, it's essential to look beyond just the price.



Common Pitfalls and Misconceptions

Necessity of the business development process

Some organizations mistakenly think that a repeatable business development process is
unnecessary. Ad hoc business development activities are occasionally successful, but they’re
mostly hit and miss. Time and again, tailoring best practices and turning them into a
repeatable process has proven effective. This offers a greater ROI—leading to achieving
organizational revenue goals—than ad hoc activities.
Importance of bid decision gates and positioning

Another misconception is that “by bidding more, we’ll win more.” This is a costly mistake
companies make, compared to those that leverage the power of bid decision gates and
effective opportunity reviews. It’s better to make the tough decision to no-bid rather than
waste money on a marginal opportunity.


Importance of early customer involvement

Many companies believe that a compliant, responsive, and well-done proposal will win the
contract. On the contrary, a proposal is often the final step in confirming a customer’s buying
decision. Effective marketing, positioning, and selling are critical to winning business—the
proposal then verifies the winning solution. A poor proposal, however, can kill a deal.



Summary
Defining, documenting, and implementing an effective business development lifecycle is a
core part of strategic planning for any business. Organizations must remember to:

     Scale and tailor the cycle to specific markets and competitive positions
     Clearly define roles and responsibilities within the cycle
     Secure leadership buy-in and support for implementing the cycle
     Document all successes and failures to learn from experience
     Enhance the customer relationship across the cycle at each phase and as part of each
     activity



Terms to Know
     Competitive Price To Win
     Market Identification
     Opportunity/Capture Plan
     SWOT



See Also
     Competitive Price To Win
     Customer and Competitor Intelligence (/focus-on-the-customer/customer-and-
     competitor-intelligence)
     Customer Relationship Management Systems (/focus-on-the-customer/customer-
     relationship-management-systems)
     End-to-End Process (/manage-processes/end-to-end-process)
     Gate Decisions (/manage-processes/gate-decisions)
     Opportunity/Capture Plan Development (/use-tools-and-systems/opportunitycapture-
     plan-development)
     Review Management (/manage-processes/review-management)




Was this article helpful?
 Give detailed feedback about this article


Related Questions:

Customer Relationship
Management Systems
(/focus-on-the-
customer/customer-
relationship-management-
systems)
Across industries and
geographies, customers tend
to behave in a...…




                                              © Copyright 2026
